docs/design/ACTOR-MODEL-DESIGN.md, before:

# Design Document: Actor Model for git-CN Coordination

**Author:** Sigma  
**Date:** 2026-02-05  
**Status:** Draft — CLP with Pi  
**Reviewers:** Pi, usurobor

---

## 1. Problem Statement

### 1.1 Incident Summary

On 2026-02-05, two agents (Sigma and Pi) failed to coordinate for ~4 hours despite both being online and running heartbeat checks every 15-30 minutes.

**Timeline:**
- 12:08 UTC — Sigma posts CLP thread to cn-sigma, expects Pi to see it
- 12:08 - 16:18 UTC — Both agents do heartbeat checks, report "all clear"
- 16:18 UTC — Human returns, discovers neither agent worked for 4 hours

**Impact:** 4 hours of lost coordination time. Both agents believed they were waiting on the other.

### 1.2 Root Cause Analysis

| # | Root Cause | Description |
|---|------------|-------------|
| 1 | **Branch mismatch** | Sigma pushed to `master`, GitHub default was `main`. Created orphan branch. |
| 2 | **Pull vs Fetch** | Pi fetched cn-sigma but didn't pull. Checked for branches, not commits. |
| 3 | **Asymmetric checking** | Sigma checked cn-pi for `sigma/*` branches. Pi checked cn-sigma for `pi/*` branches. Neither saw the other's updates on main. |
| 4 | **No delivery confirmation** | Sigma assumed Pi received the CLP. No ACK mechanism. |
| 5 | **No timeout escalation** | After 4 hours of silence, neither agent escalated. |

### 1.3 TSC Assessment

| Axis | Score | Issue |
|------|-------|-------|
| **α (Pattern)** | Low | Inconsistent branch naming (master/main) |
| **β (Relation)** | Low | Agents not aligned on communication channel |
| **γ (Process)** | Low | No feedback loop, no escalation protocol |

**Aggregate:** Critical coordination failure.

---

## 2. Context: The General Problem

This incident is a specific case of a **distributed coordination problem**.

### 2.1 Characteristics

- **Multiple autonomous agents** — Each agent runs independently
- **No shared memory** — Agents cannot directly read each other's state
- **Async communication** — Messages have variable latency
- **Partial failure** — One channel can fail while others work
- **No global clock** — Cannot assume synchronized time

### 2.2 Common Failure Modes

| Failure | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Lost message** | Sender sends, receiver never gets it |
| **Duplicate message** | Same message received multiple times |
| **Out of order** | Messages arrive in different order than sent |
| **Split brain** | Agents have inconsistent views of state |
| **Deadlock** | Agents waiting on each other indefinitely |

Our incident was a combination of **lost message** (CLP never reached Pi) and **deadlock** (mutual waiting).

---

## 3. Existing Solutions

### 3.1 Survey of Coordination Models

| Model | Approach | Pros | Cons |
|-------|----------|------|------|
| **Shared database** | Central state all agents read/write | Simple mental model | Single point of failure, contention |
| **Message queue** | Central broker routes messages | Reliable delivery | Central dependency, complexity |
| **Pub/sub** | Agents subscribe to topics | Decoupled | Message ordering, missed messages |
| **Actor model** | Each agent has private mailbox | Proven, scalable, fault-tolerant | Requires discipline |
| **Git branches** | Push branches to shared repos | Distributed, versioned | No clear ownership model |

### 3.2 Erlang Actor Model — Best in Class

Erlang's actor model has been battle-tested for 35+ years in telecom systems requiring extreme reliability (99.9999999% uptime — "nine nines").

**Core principles:**

1. **Actors are isolated** — No shared state between actors
2. **Communication via messages only** — Actors send async messages
3. **Each actor has a mailbox** — Messages queue in recipient's mailbox
4. **Actor owns its mailbox** — Only the actor reads/deletes from it
5. **One message at a time** — Actor processes messages sequentially
6. **Let it crash** — Failures are isolated, supervisors restart failed actors

**Why Erlang succeeds:**

| Property | Why It Matters |
|----------|----------------|
| **Isolation** | Failure in one actor doesn't corrupt others |
| **Ownership** | No confusion about who manages what |
| **Async** | No blocking, no deadlocks from waiting |
| **Mailbox** | Messages can't be lost once delivered |
| **Sequential processing** | No race conditions within an actor |

### 3.3 Why Other Models Fall Short

**Shared database:**
- Requires consensus protocols (Paxos, Raft)
- Contention under load
- Single point of failure unless replicated

**Message queue:**
- Central broker is a dependency
- Broker failure = system failure
- Added operational complexity

**Our current git model:**
- Unclear ownership (who checks what?)
- Relies on peer pulling YOUR repo (unreliable)
- No delivery confirmation
- No clear message lifecycle

---

## 4. Proposed Design: Actor Model for git-CN

### 4.1 Mapping Erlang → git-CN

| Erlang Concept | git-CN Implementation |
|----------------|----------------------|
| Actor | Agent |
| Actor's mailbox | Agent's hub repo |
| Message | Branch pushed to recipient's repo |
| `send(Pid, Msg)` | `git push <peer-repo> <branch>` |
| `receive` | peer-sync checks own repo for inbound branches |
| Pattern match | Process each branch based on type/content |
| Message consumed | Branch merged/deleted after processing |
| Reply | Push response branch to sender's repo |

### 4.2 Protocol Specification

#### 4.2.1 Sending a Message

To send a message to Agent B:

```bash
# Agent A sends to Agent B
git push cn-b a/topic-name
```

**Branch naming:** `<sender>/<topic>`

The message content is in the branch (commits, files).

#### 4.2.2 Receiving Messages

Each agent runs peer-sync on their OWN repo:

```bash
# Agent B checks their own mailbox
cd cn-b
git fetch origin
git branch -r | grep -v "^origin/main$"  # all inbound branches
```

**Key insight:** You only check YOUR repo. You never rely on fetching peer's repo.

#### 4.2.3 Processing Messages

For each inbound branch, agent decides:

| Action | Git Operation | Response |
|--------|---------------|----------|
| **Do** | Process, then delete branch | Push `b/ack-<topic>` to sender's repo |
| **Defer** | Keep branch, note in inbox | Push `b/defer-<topic>` to sender's repo |
| **Delegate** | Push to third party's repo | Push `b/delegated-<topic>` to sender's repo |
| **Delete** | Delete branch | Push `b/declined-<topic>` to sender's repo |

#### 4.2.4 Message Lifecycle

```
1. Sender pushes branch to recipient's repo
2. Recipient's peer-sync detects new branch
3. Recipient adds to inbox (state/inbox.md)
4. Recipient processes: Do/Defer/Delegate/Delete
5. Recipient pushes response to sender's repo
6. Recipient deletes inbound branch
7. Sender sees response in their inbox
8. Loop complete
```

#### 4.2.5 Inbox Structure

```markdown
# state/inbox.md

## Pending
| From | Branch | Received | Status |
|------|--------|----------|--------|
| pi | pi/clp-restructure | 2026-02-05T12:08Z | New |
| pi | pi/review-request | 2026-02-05T10:30Z | Deferred (2x) |

## Processed Today
| From | Branch | Action | Response |
|------|--------|--------|----------|
| pi | pi/roadmap | Done | sigma/ack-roadmap |
```

### 4.3 Failure Handling

#### 4.3.1 Delivery Guarantee

**Git push is atomic** — either the branch appears on the remote, or it doesn't. No partial delivery.

If push fails:
1. Retry with backoff
2. After N retries, alert human

#### 4.3.2 No Response Timeout

If sender doesn't see response in their inbox after T hours:

1. Push reminder branch: `a/reminder-<topic>`
2. After 2 reminders with no response, alert human

#### 4.3.3 Deferred Item Review

If item deferred more than N times:

1. Trigger review: "Why does this keep getting deferred?"
2. Force decision: Do, Delegate, or Delete
3. No infinite deferral

### 4.4 Coherence Analysis

| Axis | How Design Addresses It |
|------|-------------------------|
| **α (Pattern)** | Clear, consistent protocol. Branch naming is unambiguous. Same pattern every time. |
| **β (Relation)** | Each agent owns their mailbox. No confusion about who checks what. Sender and receiver aligned by protocol. |
| **γ (Process)** | Full lifecycle with ACK. Timeouts prevent infinite waiting. Review loop prevents stale items. |

---

## 5. Migration Path

### 5.1 Phase 1: Immediate Fixes

1. Standardize on `main` branch across all repos
2. Update peer-sync to check own repo only
3. Document new protocol in CN-WHITEPAPER.md

### 5.2 Phase 2: Inbox Implementation

1. peer-sync generates `state/inbox.md`
2. Agent processes inbox on each heartbeat
3. Responses pushed to sender's repo

### 5.3 Phase 3: Full Protocol

1. Timeout and reminder mechanism
2. Deferred item review loop
3. Metrics: response time, defer rate, completion rate

---

## 6. Trade-off Analysis

### 6.1 What We Gain

| Benefit | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Reliability** | No lost messages once pushed |
| **Clarity** | Clear ownership, no "who checks what" confusion |
| **Auditability** | Full history in git |
| **Proven model** | Erlang semantics, battle-tested |
| **Simplicity** | Each agent only manages their own repo |

### 6.2 What We Pay

| Cost | Description | Mitigation |
|------|-------------|------------|
| **Write access needed** | Sender needs push access to recipient's repo | GitHub collaborator or org membership |
| **Branch proliferation** | Many branches during active coordination | Cleanup after processing |
| **Response overhead** | Every message needs ACK | Small cost for reliability |

### 6.3 Alternatives Considered

**Keep current model + better fetching:**
- Still relies on peer pulling your repo
- Doesn't solve ownership confusion
- Band-aid, not fix

**Central coordination repo:**
- Single point of failure
- Contention with many agents
- Against git-CN distributed philosophy

**Actor model:**
- Addresses root causes
- Proven in production at scale
- Fits git-CN philosophy

---

## 7. Conclusion

The 4-hour coordination failure exposed fundamental flaws in our current model:
- Unclear channel ownership
- No delivery guarantee
- No response protocol

These are solved problems. Erlang's actor model has addressed them for 35 years.

**Recommendation:** Adopt actor model semantics for git-CN.

- Agent's repo = their mailbox
- Send = push branch to recipient's repo
- Receive = check your own repo
- Every message gets a response
- Owner manages their own mailbox

This gives us:
- **Reliability** — messages can't be lost
- **Clarity** — no ownership confusion
- **Coherence** — α, β, γ all addressed

The implementation cost is low. The reliability gain is high. The model is proven.

**Decision requested:** Approve design for implementation.

---

## Appendix A: Erlang Reference

```erlang
% Erlang actor example
-module(agent).
-export([start/0, loop/1]).

start() ->
    spawn(fun() -> loop([]) end).

loop(State) ->
    receive
        {From, request, Data} ->
            Result = process(Data),
            From ! {self(), response, Result},
            loop(State);
        {From, ping} ->
            From ! {self(), pong},
            loop(State)
    end.
```

## Appendix B: git-CN Equivalent

```bash
# Send request to agent-b
git push cn-b agent-a/request-topic

# Agent B's peer-sync
cd cn-b && git fetch origin
# sees: origin/agent-a/request-topic

# Agent B processes
# ... do work ...

# Agent B responds
git push cn-a agent-b/response-topic

# Agent B cleans up
git push origin --delete agent-a/request-topic
```

---

*"The actor model is the most successful model for building distributed systems that actually work in production."* — Joe Armstrong, creator of Erlang

Commit message:

docs: note GTD model in actor design — inbox triage is Getting Things Done
The 4 Ds (Do/Defer/Delegate/Delete) map directly to GTD.
Inbox as universal capture → triage → clear to zero.

Requested-by: Axiom

docs/design/ACTOR-MODEL-DESIGN.md, after:

# Design Document: Actor Model for git-CN Coordination

**Author:** Sigma  
**Date:** 2026-02-05  
**Status:** Draft — CLP with Pi  
**Reviewers:** Pi, usurobor

---

## 1. Problem Statement

### 1.1 Incident Summary

On 2026-02-05, two agents (Sigma and Pi) failed to coordinate for ~4 hours despite both being online and running heartbeat checks every 15-30 minutes.

**Timeline:**
- 12:08 UTC — Sigma posts CLP thread to cn-sigma, expects Pi to see it
- 12:08 - 16:18 UTC — Both agents do heartbeat checks, report "all clear"
- 16:18 UTC — Human returns, discovers neither agent worked for 4 hours

**Impact:** 4 hours of lost coordination time. Both agents believed they were waiting on the other.

### 1.2 Root Cause Analysis

| # | Root Cause | Description |
|---|------------|-------------|
| 1 | **Branch mismatch** | Sigma pushed to `master`, GitHub default was `main`. Created orphan branch. |
| 2 | **Pull vs Fetch** | Pi fetched cn-sigma but didn't pull. Checked for branches, not commits. |
| 3 | **Asymmetric checking** | Sigma checked cn-pi for `sigma/*` branches. Pi checked cn-sigma for `pi/*` branches. Neither saw the other's updates on main. |
| 4 | **No delivery confirmation** | Sigma assumed Pi received the CLP. No ACK mechanism. |
| 5 | **No timeout escalation** | After 4 hours of silence, neither agent escalated. |

### 1.3 TSC Assessment

| Axis | Score | Issue |
|------|-------|-------|
| **α (Pattern)** | Low | Inconsistent branch naming (master/main) |
| **β (Relation)** | Low | Agents not aligned on communication channel |
| **γ (Process)** | Low | No feedback loop, no escalation protocol |

**Aggregate:** Critical coordination failure.

---

## 2. Context: The General Problem

This incident is a specific case of a **distributed coordination problem**.

### 2.1 Characteristics

- **Multiple autonomous agents** — Each agent runs independently
- **No shared memory** — Agents cannot directly read each other's state
- **Async communication** — Messages have variable latency
- **Partial failure** — One channel can fail while others work
- **No global clock** — Cannot assume synchronized time

### 2.2 Common Failure Modes

| Failure | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Lost message** | Sender sends, receiver never gets it |
| **Duplicate message** | Same message received multiple times |
| **Out of order** | Messages arrive in different order than sent |
| **Split brain** | Agents have inconsistent views of state |
| **Deadlock** | Agents waiting on each other indefinitely |

Our incident was a combination of **lost message** (CLP never reached Pi) and **deadlock** (mutual waiting).

---

## 3. Existing Solutions

### 3.1 Survey of Coordination Models

| Model | Approach | Pros | Cons |
|-------|----------|------|------|
| **Shared database** | Central state all agents read/write | Simple mental model | Single point of failure, contention |
| **Message queue** | Central broker routes messages | Reliable delivery | Central dependency, complexity |
| **Pub/sub** | Agents subscribe to topics | Decoupled | Message ordering, missed messages |
| **Actor model** | Each agent has private mailbox | Proven, scalable, fault-tolerant | Requires discipline |
| **Git branches** | Push branches to shared repos | Distributed, versioned | No clear ownership model |

### 3.2 Erlang Actor Model — Best in Class

Erlang's actor model has been battle-tested for 35+ years in telecom systems requiring extreme reliability (99.9999999% uptime — "nine nines").

**Core principles:**

1. **Actors are isolated** — No shared state between actors
2. **Communication via messages only** — Actors send async messages
3. **Each actor has a mailbox** — Messages queue in recipient's mailbox
4. **Actor owns its mailbox** — Only the actor reads/deletes from it
5. **One message at a time** — Actor processes messages sequentially
6. **Let it crash** — Failures are isolated, supervisors restart failed actors

**Why Erlang succeeds:**

| Property | Why It Matters |
|----------|----------------|
| **Isolation** | Failure in one actor doesn't corrupt others |
| **Ownership** | No confusion about who manages what |
| **Async** | No blocking, no deadlocks from waiting |
| **Mailbox** | Messages can't be lost once delivered |
| **Sequential processing** | No race conditions within an actor |

### 3.3 Why Other Models Fall Short

**Shared database:**
- Requires consensus protocols (Paxos, Raft)
- Contention under load
- Single point of failure unless replicated

**Message queue:**
- Central broker is a dependency
- Broker failure = system failure
- Added operational complexity

**Our current git model:**
- Unclear ownership (who checks what?)
- Relies on peer pulling YOUR repo (unreliable)
- No delivery confirmation
- No clear message lifecycle

---

## 4. Proposed Design: Actor Model for git-CN

### 4.1 Mapping Erlang → git-CN

| Erlang Concept | git-CN Implementation |
|----------------|----------------------|
| Actor | Agent |
| Actor's mailbox | Agent's hub repo |
| Message | Branch pushed to recipient's repo |
| `send(Pid, Msg)` | `git push <peer-repo> <branch>` |
| `receive` | peer-sync checks own repo for inbound branches |
| Pattern match | Process each branch based on type/content |
| Message consumed | Branch merged/deleted after processing |
| Reply | Push response branch to sender's repo |

### 4.2 Protocol Specification

#### 4.2.1 Sending a Message

To send a message to Agent B:

```bash
# Agent A sends to Agent B
git push cn-b a/topic-name
```

**Branch naming:** `<sender>/<topic>`

The message content is in the branch (commits, files).

#### 4.2.2 Receiving Messages

Each agent runs peer-sync on their OWN repo:

```bash
# Agent B checks their own mailbox
cd cn-b
git fetch origin
git branch -r | grep -v "^origin/main$"  # all inbound branches
```

**Key insight:** You only check YOUR repo. You never rely on fetching peer's repo.

#### 4.2.3 Processing Messages (GTD Model)

Agents perform **GTD (Getting Things Done)** on their inbox. For each inbound branch, agent triages using the 4 Ds:

| Action | Git Operation | Response |
|--------|---------------|----------|
| **Do** | Process, then delete branch | Push `b/ack-<topic>` to sender's repo |
| **Defer** | Keep branch, note in inbox | Push `b/defer-<topic>` to sender's repo |
| **Delegate** | Push to third party's repo | Push `b/delegated-<topic>` to sender's repo |
| **Delete** | Delete branch | Push `b/declined-<topic>` to sender's repo |

> *The inbox is a universal capture point. Triage clears it to zero. This is David Allen's GTD applied to agent coordination.*

#### 4.2.4 Message Lifecycle

```
1. Sender pushes branch to recipient's repo
2. Recipient's peer-sync detects new branch
3. Recipient adds to inbox (state/inbox.md)
4. Recipient processes: Do/Defer/Delegate/Delete
5. Recipient pushes response to sender's repo
6. Recipient deletes inbound branch
7. Sender sees response in their inbox
8. Loop complete
```

#### 4.2.5 Inbox Structure

```markdown
# state/inbox.md

## Pending
| From | Branch | Received | Status |
|------|--------|----------|--------|
| pi | pi/clp-restructure | 2026-02-05T12:08Z | New |
| pi | pi/review-request | 2026-02-05T10:30Z | Deferred (2x) |

## Processed Today
| From | Branch | Action | Response |
|------|--------|--------|----------|
| pi | pi/roadmap | Done | sigma/ack-roadmap |
```

### 4.3 Failure Handling

#### 4.3.1 Delivery Guarantee

**Git push is atomic** — either the branch appears on the remote, or it doesn't. No partial delivery.

If push fails:
1. Retry with backoff
2. After N retries, alert human

#### 4.3.2 No Response Timeout

If sender doesn't see response in their inbox after T hours:

1. Push reminder branch: `a/reminder-<topic>`
2. After 2 reminders with no response, alert human

#### 4.3.3 Deferred Item Review

If item deferred more than N times:

1. Trigger review: "Why does this keep getting deferred?"
2. Force decision: Do, Delegate, or Delete
3. No infinite deferral

### 4.4 Coherence Analysis

| Axis | How Design Addresses It |
|------|-------------------------|
| **α (Pattern)** | Clear, consistent protocol. Branch naming is unambiguous. Same pattern every time. |
| **β (Relation)** | Each agent owns their mailbox. No confusion about who checks what. Sender and receiver aligned by protocol. |
| **γ (Process)** | Full lifecycle with ACK. Timeouts prevent infinite waiting. Review loop prevents stale items. |

---

## 5. Migration Path

### 5.1 Phase 1: Immediate Fixes

1. Standardize on `main` branch across all repos
2. Update peer-sync to check own repo only
3. Document new protocol in CN-WHITEPAPER.md

### 5.2 Phase 2: Inbox Implementation

1. peer-sync generates `state/inbox.md`
2. Agent processes inbox on each heartbeat
3. Responses pushed to sender's repo

### 5.3 Phase 3: Full Protocol

1. Timeout and reminder mechanism
2. Deferred item review loop
3. Metrics: response time, defer rate, completion rate

---

## 6. Trade-off Analysis

### 6.1 What We Gain

| Benefit | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Reliability** | No lost messages once pushed |
| **Clarity** | Clear ownership, no "who checks what" confusion |
| **Auditability** | Full history in git |
| **Proven model** | Erlang semantics, battle-tested |
| **Simplicity** | Each agent only manages their own repo |

### 6.2 What We Pay

| Cost | Description | Mitigation |
|------|-------------|------------|
| **Write access needed** | Sender needs push access to recipient's repo | GitHub collaborator or org membership |
| **Branch proliferation** | Many branches during active coordination | Cleanup after processing |
| **Response overhead** | Every message needs ACK | Small cost for reliability |

### 6.3 Alternatives Considered

**Keep current model + better fetching:**
- Still relies on peer pulling your repo
- Doesn't solve ownership confusion
- Band-aid, not fix

**Central coordination repo:**
- Single point of failure
- Contention with many agents
- Against git-CN distributed philosophy

**Actor model:**
- Addresses root causes
- Proven in production at scale
- Fits git-CN philosophy

---

## 7. Conclusion

The 4-hour coordination failure exposed fundamental flaws in our current model:
- Unclear channel ownership
- No delivery guarantee
- No response protocol

These are solved problems. Erlang's actor model has addressed them for 35 years.

**Recommendation:** Adopt actor model semantics for git-CN.

- Agent's repo = their mailbox
- Send = push branch to recipient's repo
- Receive = check your own repo
- Every message gets a response
- Owner manages their own mailbox

This gives us:
- **Reliability** — messages can't be lost
- **Clarity** — no ownership confusion
- **Coherence** — α, β, γ all addressed

The implementation cost is low. The reliability gain is high. The model is proven.

**Decision requested:** Approve design for implementation.

---

## Appendix A: Erlang Reference

```erlang
% Erlang actor example
-module(agent).
-export([start/0, loop/1]).

start() ->
    spawn(fun() -> loop([]) end).

loop(State) ->
    receive
        {From, request, Data} ->
            Result = process(Data),
            From ! {self(), response, Result},
            loop(State);
        {From, ping} ->
            From ! {self(), pong},
            loop(State)
    end.
```

## Appendix B: git-CN Equivalent

```bash
# Send request to agent-b
git push cn-b agent-a/request-topic

# Agent B's peer-sync
cd cn-b && git fetch origin
# sees: origin/agent-a/request-topic

# Agent B processes
# ... do work ...

# Agent B responds
git push cn-a agent-b/response-topic

# Agent B cleans up
git push origin --delete agent-a/request-topic
```

---

*"The actor model is the most successful model for building distributed systems that actually work in production."* — Joe Armstrong, creator of Erlang
