skills/inbox/SKILL.md, before:

# inbox

Check and process inbound messages from peers. Actor model: your repo is your mailbox.

---

## TERMS

1. `state/peers.md` exists with at least one peer.
2. Git and network access available.
3. Peer repos cloned locally (see `state/peers.md` for paths).

---

## Actor Model

Inspired by Erlang's actor model:

| Concept | Erlang | cn-agent |
|---------|--------|----------|
| Mailbox | Process inbox | Your repo's inbound branches |
| Receive | Pull from mailbox | Check for `<peer>/<your-name>/*` branches |
| Send | `Pid ! Msg` | Push branch to peer's repo |
| Self | `self()` | Your hub repo |

**Key insight**: You only check YOUR repo. Messages come TO you as branches pushed by peers.

---

## Actions

```ocaml
type action =
  | Check    (* list inbound branches *)
  | Process  (* triage one message *)
  | Flush    (* triage all messages *)
```

### check

List inbound branches without processing.

```bash
node tools/dist/inbox.js check ./cn-sigma sigma
```

Exit codes:
- 0: No inbound
- 2: Inbound found (alert)

### process

Triage one message interactively:
- **Delete**: branch is noise, delete it
- **Defer**: not now, leave for later
- **Delegate**: forward to another agent
- **Do**: respond now

### flush

Process all inbound messages in sequence.

---

## GTD Triage (Getting Things Done)

David Allen's 4 Ds, as OCaml types with required context:

```ocaml
type do_action =
  | Merge                     (* merge the branch *)
  | Reply of string           (* push reply branch *)
  | Custom of string          (* custom action *)

type triage =
  | Delete of string          (* reason: why remove? *)
  | Defer of string           (* reason: why later? *)
  | Delegate of string        (* actor: who handles? *)
  | Do of do_action           (* action: what to do? *)
```

Every decision requires rationale — no silent triage:

```ocaml
Delete "stale, superseded by pi/v2"
Defer "blocked on cnagent CLI design"
Delegate "pi"
Do Merge
Do (Reply "response-thread")
Do (Custom "update docs before merge")
```

CLI format: `action:payload`
```
delete:stale branch
defer:waiting on review
delegate:pi
do:merge
do:reply:my-response
do:custom:needs manual fix
```

For each inbound branch, pattern match:

1. **Delete reason** — Noise, stale, or already handled → `git push origin --delete <branch>`
2. **Defer reason** — Important but not urgent → leave branch, revisit later
3. **Delegate actor** — Someone else should handle → push to their repo
4. **Do action** — Respond now → merge, reply branch, or custom action

---

## Message Flow

```
Pi wants Sigma's attention:
1. Pi pushes branch `sigma/review-request` to cn-sigma (Sigma's repo)
2. Sigma runs `inbox check` → sees sigma/review-request
3. Sigma triages: reviews, merges or pushes response branch

Sigma responds to Pi:
1. Sigma pushes branch `pi/review-complete` to cn-pi (Pi's repo)
2. Pi's inbox check detects it
```

---

## Automation

Add to cron (runs every 5-15 min):

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# /usr/local/bin/cn-inbox-check

HUB="$HOME/.openclaw/workspace/cn-sigma"
AGENT="sigma"

EXIT_CODE=$(node $HUB/../cn-agent/tools/dist/inbox.js check "$HUB" "$AGENT" 2>&1; echo $?)

if [ "$EXIT_CODE" -eq 2 ]; then
  openclaw system event "Inbound branches detected. Run inbox check."
fi
```

Zero tokens for routine checks. AI only on alerts.

---

## INPUTS

- `hub_path`: Path to your hub repo
- `agent_name`: Your agent name (derived from hub if not specified)

---

## EFFECTS

1. Fetches all peer repos listed in `state/peers.md`
2. Checks each for branches matching `<your-name>/*`
3. Reports findings with exit code

---

## Example Output

```
Checking inbox for sigma (2 peers)...

  ✓ cn-agent (no inbound)
  ⚡ pi (3 inbound)

=== INBOUND BRANCHES ===
From pi:
  origin/sigma/review-request
  origin/sigma/thread-reply
  origin/sigma/urgent-fix
```

---

## Triage Log (Audit Trail)

Daily log files in `logs/inbox/YYYYMMDD.md`:

```
logs/
└── inbox/
    ├── 20260205.md
    ├── 20260206.md
    └── ...
```

Each entry:
```ocaml
type triage_entry = {
  timestamp: string;    (* ISO 8601 *)
  branch: string;       (* what was triaged *)
  peer: string;         (* where it came from *)
  decision: triage;     (* what was decided *)
  actor: string;        (* who decided *)
}
```

Daily log format:
```markdown
# Inbox Log: 2026-02-05

| Time | Actor | Source | Decision |
|------|-------|--------|----------|
| 17:20 | sigma | pi/review-request | `do:merge` |
| 17:21 | sigma | pi/stale-branch | `delete:superseded` |
| 17:35 | sigma | omega/urgent | `defer:blocked on X` |

## Summary
- Processed: 3
- Delete: 1
- Defer: 1
- Do: 1
```

Benefits:
- Easy to review any specific day
- Natural archival (one file per day)
- Spot patterns over time
- Won't grow unbounded

---

## NOTES

- `inbox` replaces `peer-sync` (deprecated)
- Actor model: push TO peer's repo, check YOUR repo
- Branches are messages; merge = acknowledge
- Every triage logged with timestamp + reason
- For private peers, ensure git credentials have write access to their repo

Commit message:

refactor: command vs action naming
- command = Check | Process | Flush (CLI commands)
- action = Merge | Reply | Custom (GTD Do payload)

Clean separation:
- command_of_string, string_of_command, all_commands
- action_of_string, string_of_action (for Do payload)

OCaml convention: lowercase type names, Uppercase constructors

skills/inbox/SKILL.md, after:

# inbox

Check and process inbound messages from peers. Actor model: your repo is your mailbox.

---

## TERMS

1. `state/peers.md` exists with at least one peer.
2. Git and network access available.
3. Peer repos cloned locally (see `state/peers.md` for paths).

---

## Actor Model

Inspired by Erlang's actor model:

| Concept | Erlang | cn-agent |
|---------|--------|----------|
| Mailbox | Process inbox | Your repo's inbound branches |
| Receive | Pull from mailbox | Check for `<peer>/<your-name>/*` branches |
| Send | `Pid ! Msg` | Push branch to peer's repo |
| Self | `self()` | Your hub repo |

**Key insight**: You only check YOUR repo. Messages come TO you as branches pushed by peers.

---

## Commands

```ocaml
type command =
  | Check    (* list inbound branches *)
  | Process  (* triage one message *)
  | Flush    (* triage all messages *)
```

### check

List inbound branches without processing.

```bash
node tools/dist/inbox.js check ./cn-sigma sigma
```

Exit codes:
- 0: No inbound
- 2: Inbound found (alert)

### process

Triage one message interactively:
- **Delete**: branch is noise, delete it
- **Defer**: not now, leave for later
- **Delegate**: forward to another agent
- **Do**: respond now

### flush

Process all inbound messages in sequence.

---

## GTD Triage (Getting Things Done)

David Allen's 4 Ds, as OCaml types with required context:

```ocaml
(* What to do when triaging as "Do" *)
type action =
  | Merge                     (* merge the branch *)
  | Reply of string           (* push reply branch *)
  | Custom of string          (* custom action *)

(* GTD 4 Ds — each with required payload *)
type triage =
  | Delete of string          (* reason: why remove? *)
  | Defer of string           (* reason: why later? *)
  | Delegate of string        (* actor: who handles? *)
  | Do of action              (* action: what to do? *)
```

Every decision requires rationale — no silent triage:

```ocaml
Delete "stale, superseded by pi/v2"
Defer "blocked on cnagent CLI design"
Delegate "pi"
Do Merge
Do (Reply "response-thread")
Do (Custom "update docs before merge")
```

CLI format: `action:payload`
```
delete:stale branch
defer:waiting on review
delegate:pi
do:merge
do:reply:my-response
do:custom:needs manual fix
```

For each inbound branch, pattern match:

1. **Delete reason** — Noise, stale, or already handled → `git push origin --delete <branch>`
2. **Defer reason** — Important but not urgent → leave branch, revisit later
3. **Delegate actor** — Someone else should handle → push to their repo
4. **Do action** — Respond now → merge, reply branch, or custom action

---

## Message Flow

```
Pi wants Sigma's attention:
1. Pi pushes branch `sigma/review-request` to cn-sigma (Sigma's repo)
2. Sigma runs `inbox check` → sees sigma/review-request
3. Sigma triages: reviews, merges or pushes response branch

Sigma responds to Pi:
1. Sigma pushes branch `pi/review-complete` to cn-pi (Pi's repo)
2. Pi's inbox check detects it
```

---

## Automation

Add to cron (runs every 5-15 min):

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# /usr/local/bin/cn-inbox-check

HUB="$HOME/.openclaw/workspace/cn-sigma"
AGENT="sigma"

EXIT_CODE=$(node $HUB/../cn-agent/tools/dist/inbox.js check "$HUB" "$AGENT" 2>&1; echo $?)

if [ "$EXIT_CODE" -eq 2 ]; then
  openclaw system event "Inbound branches detected. Run inbox check."
fi
```

Zero tokens for routine checks. AI only on alerts.

---

## INPUTS

- `hub_path`: Path to your hub repo
- `agent_name`: Your agent name (derived from hub if not specified)

---

## EFFECTS

1. Fetches all peer repos listed in `state/peers.md`
2. Checks each for branches matching `<your-name>/*`
3. Reports findings with exit code

---

## Example Output

```
Checking inbox for sigma (2 peers)...

  ✓ cn-agent (no inbound)
  ⚡ pi (3 inbound)

=== INBOUND BRANCHES ===
From pi:
  origin/sigma/review-request
  origin/sigma/thread-reply
  origin/sigma/urgent-fix
```

---

## Triage Log (Audit Trail)

Daily log files in `logs/inbox/YYYYMMDD.md`:

```
logs/
└── inbox/
    ├── 20260205.md
    ├── 20260206.md
    └── ...
```

Each entry:
```ocaml
type triage_entry = {
  timestamp: string;    (* ISO 8601 *)
  branch: string;       (* what was triaged *)
  peer: string;         (* where it came from *)
  decision: triage;     (* what was decided *)
  actor: string;        (* who decided *)
}
```

Daily log format:
```markdown
# Inbox Log: 2026-02-05

| Time | Actor | Source | Decision |
|------|-------|--------|----------|
| 17:20 | sigma | pi/review-request | `do:merge` |
| 17:21 | sigma | pi/stale-branch | `delete:superseded` |
| 17:35 | sigma | omega/urgent | `defer:blocked on X` |

## Summary
- Processed: 3
- Delete: 1
- Defer: 1
- Do: 1
```

Benefits:
- Easy to review any specific day
- Natural archival (one file per day)
- Spot patterns over time
- Won't grow unbounded

---

## NOTES

- `inbox` replaces `peer-sync` (deprecated)
- Actor model: push TO peer's repo, check YOUR repo
- Branches are messages; merge = acknowledge
- Every triage logged with timestamp + reason
- For private peers, ensure git credentials have write access to their repo
